Sadiq Khan became the first Muslim mayor of London in the early hours of Saturday after
a bitter campaign marred by accusations of dog whistle racism on the part of his rival,
the millionaire environmentalist Zac Goldsmith.
The Labour MP for Tooting in south London finished comfortably ahead of his
Conservative rival whose camp accused Khan of “pandering to extremists” and tried to
depict him as a Jeremy Corbyn loyalist who planned to use the capital for a “dangerous
experiment”.
In his victory speech, Khan said he was “humbled” to be elected. In sharp remarks, he
directly addressed Goldsmith’s campaign saying that he was proud “that London has
today chosen hope over fear and unity over division”.
He added: “I hope that we will never be offered such a stark choice again. Fear does not
make us safer, it only makes it weaker – and the politics of fear is simply not welcome in
our city. I promise to always be a mayor for all Londoners, to work hard to make life
better for every Londoner regardless of your background.
“I have a burning ambition for London. I want every single Londoner to get the
opportunities that our city gave to me and my family.”
Referring to his late father, who came to London from Pakistan, Khan said he would have
been proud “that the city he chose to call his own had now chosen one of his children to
be mayor”.
Goldsmith thanked his “wonderful, inspiring team”. “I am disappointed by the result
that I won’t be able to deliver a manifesto I am really proud of,” he said.
“I congratulate Sadiq Khan and I wish him well as he sets out to build on the successes
that we have seen under Boris Johnson and to take them even further.”
Final confirmation of the result was delayed until after midnight. Jeff Jacobs, the
returning officer for Greater London, the senior official overseeing the count, said:
“There were some minor discrepancies with the mayoral figures and we have to take the
time to check them.
With all first-preference votes counted, Khan was on 44%, nine points ahead of
Goldsmith. It was mathematically impossible that Goldsmith could catch him on secondpreference
votes. “Sadiq has won without question,” said Peter Kellner, the former
chairman of the market research firm YouGov, as he watched the results come in at City
Hall. “He is well ahead on the first count and that’s not going to change radically.”
As the result became clear, Conservatives turned on Goldsmith’s campaign. A former
Conservative party chairman, Sayeeda Warsi, described it as an “appalling dog whistle
campaign” and said it “lost us the election, our reputation and credibility on issues of
race and religion”.
Roger Evans, the outgoing deputy mayor, said Goldsmith’s “very foolish” campaign left a
“negative legacy which we in London are going to have to clear up long after the people
who ran Zac Goldsmith’s campaign have gone on their way”.
Andrew Boff, a senior Tory on the London assembly, said: “I hope we don’t do this stupid
thing again by trying to bring Sadiq down by saying he is an extremist. He is not an
extremist. He went out and engaged with people with orthodox religious views. Dialogue
is not assisted by shutting people out.”
Even Goldsmith’s sister, Jemima, tweeted: “Sad that Zac’s campaign did not reflect who I
know him to be – an eco friendly, independent-minded politician with integrity.”
The result is a boost for the Labour leadership after generally poor results in Scotland,
England and Wales. Goldsmith had sought to depict Khan as a Corbyn loyalist who
planned to use the capital for a “dangerous experiment”.
Labour also achieved majority in the London assembly which scrutinises the mayor and
his officials.
During his campaign, Khan said he would make solving London’s housing crisis a key
priority and place a freeze on public transport fares for four years.
He said he would set a target that half of all new homes should be “genuinely affordable”
and promised to boost landlord licensing, as well as name and shame rogue landlords.
Oxford Street would be pedestrianised and the capital’s air quality would be restored to
legal and safe levels.
The married father of two became a partner in a human rights law firm at the age of 27.
He was the fifth of eight children, the son of a bus driver and was brought up in a council
flat. He chaired the human rights group Liberty and was elected to parliament in Tooting
in 2005, becoming transport minister in the last year of Gordon Brown’s government –
the first Asian and first Muslim.
Khan led Goldsmith, the MP for Richmond Park, for almost the whole campaign but his
lead narrowed from 16 points a fortnight ago to nine points on polling day, according to
YouGov. There was speculation that the antisemitism row surrounding Labour, which
resulted in the party suspending the MP Naz Shah and the last Labour London mayor,
Ken Livingstone, could dent his hopes.
Goldsmith’s campaign, overseen by the firm led by the Tory election strategist Lynton
Crosby, sought to paint Khan, whose family are from Pakistan, as a supporter of Muslim
extremists.
It sent leaflets to Hindu, Sikh and Tamil voters saying Khan was dangerous. they did not
mention that he was a Muslim, but several recipients felt it was divisive “gutter politics”.
Another letter, which warned that Labour wanted to tax gold jewellery owned by many
Indian families, was also seen as stoking community tensions.
The home secretary, Theresa May, said Khan was unsafe to run London at a time when
there was “a significant threat of terrorism”, because of his history of defending
extremists when he was a human rights lawyer.
Boris Johnson, who repeatedly joined Goldsmith on the campaign trail, said: “In Islam
and the Labour party there is a struggle going on, and in both cases Khan – whatever his
real views – is pandering to the extremists.”